# Clustering of weak lensing critical points
The statistics of critical points, both in 3D and 2D, have attracted significant interest due to their applications in cosmology. In 2D, the statistics of both peaks (maxima) and voids (minima) in weak gravitational lensing have been widely studied and applied to infer cosmological parameters using data from Stage-III surveys, including the Dark Energy Survey (DES), the Kilo-Degree Survey (KiDS), and the Hyper Suprime-Cam SSP Survey (HSC). These studies demonstrate that peaks and voids capture non-Gaussian information in the cosmological field. When combined with the weak lensing angular power spectrum, they significantly enhance parameter constraints compared to using the angular power spectrum alone. In particular for the parameter S8, several studies reported improvements in constraints of approximately 35% to 40%.

However, all these studies in weak lensing relied on a simulation-based inference approach, where the peak and void statistics were emulated using a grid of N-body simulations spanning various cosmologies, often with machine learning tools such as deep neural networks or Gaussian processes. This approach carries the risk of propagating numerical systematics inherent in the simulations into the emulated statistics, potentially biasing the resulting cosmological inferences (Cannon et al. 2022; Horowitz & Melchior 2022). Furthermore, from an analytical modeling perspective, this method lacks a robust theoretical foundation derived from first principles, while most previous analytical modeling of peak and void statistics generally assumes a Gaussian cosmological density field. However, the weak lensing fields on our scales of interest are not Gaussian distributed as a consequence of the non-linear evolution of the density field in the late Universe.

We develop the analytical formulas for the power spectra and 2-point correlation functions (2PCFs) of 2D critical points, including peaks/maxima, voids/minima and saddle points, in mildly non-Gaussian weak gravitational lensing field. We apply the perturbative bias expansion to model the clustering of 2D critical points. A generalized Gram-Charlier A series expansion, with the generalized Wiener-Hermite functionals as basis, is used to describe the probability density functional of the 2D cosmic density field with respect to a Gaussian distribution. The number density functions of critical points are decomposed onto the dual basis functions with the expansion coefficients interpreted as the 2D critical point bias functions.

We successfully derive the power spectrum of weak lensing critical points up to the next-to-next-to-leading order (NNLO), including linear terms of trispectrum of the weak lensing field. Numerically we calculate those power spectra up to the next-to-leading order (NLO), including linear terms of bispectrum, and transform them to the corresponding 2PCFs. We observe similar properties in these results to the clustering of 3D critical points measured from N-body simulations in previous works. An exact Monte Carlo (MC) integration is calculated assuming the Gaussian distributed density field to validate our theoretical prediction. The framework of this paper can find several applications to statistical analyses of the weak lensing fields.
